What's new in Libplanet 0.11–0.19 (#143)
planetarium/snack.planetarium.dev: content/posts/2021/10/libplanet-0.11-0.19/index.eng.md

---
title: What's new in Libplanet 0.11–0.19
date: 2021-10-29
authors: [hong.minhee]
---

Hello.  Long time no see.  [Libplanet][][^1] has released several minor
versions over the past few months.  However, as our release policy and cycle
changed, and as we had responded to deal with diverse problems on the mainnet

> of our first game <cite>[Nine Chronicles]</cite>, which is powered by Libplanet, we'd been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of our first game <cite>[Nine Chronicles]</cite>, powered by Libplanet, we'd been
```
The original sentence isn't grammatically incorrect. But I suggest shortening it this way for readability because the sentence is pretty long.

unable to afford to keep up with the updates.  So let's focus on some of

> the key changes that have made in between the past releases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the key changes that have been made in between the past releases.
```

[^1]: Libplanet is a common library that abstracts out the implementation
      details of decentralized multiplayer gaming such as peer-to-peer
      networking and data synchronization.

[Libplanet]: https://libplanet.io/
[Nine Chronicles]: https://nine-chronicles.com/

New Release Cycle
-----------------

Previously, Libplanet had no clear rules for its release cycle.  It was just
simply giving a new version number to a collection of unreleased changes when

> there is a big API change or some time has passed since the last release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
there is a big API change, or some time has passed since the last release.
```

[0.13.0]: https://github.com/planetarium/libplanet/releases/tag/0.13.0
[0.14.0]: https://github.com/planetarium/libplanet/releases/tag/0.14.0
[0.15.0]: https://github.com/planetarium/libplanet/releases/tag/0.15.0
[0.16.0]: https://github.com/planetarium/libplanet/releases/tag/0.16.0
[0.17.0]: https://github.com/planetarium/libplanet/releases/tag/0.17.0
[0.18.0]: https://github.com/planetarium/libplanet/releases/tag/0.18.0
[0.19.0]: https://github.com/planetarium/libplanet/releases/tag/0.19.0

Protocol Versions
-----------------

*Added in version [0.11.0].*

A protocol version is a property of a block that represents in which version of
Libplanet used for mining.  It helps games powered by Libplanet to easily
upgrade the Libplanet version, and on the Libplanet side, it allows us to
add new functionalities without breaking backward compatibility with existing
networks.

API-wise, it is exposed through
the [`Block<T>.ProtocolVersion` property][Block<T>.ProtocolVersion], which is
a 32-bit integer.  Those numbers solely represent a version of the network
protocol, which is distinct from a version of the library package (on NuGet

> Gallery).  According to Semantic Versioning, patch releases never increase

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gallery).  In compliance with Semantic Versioning, patch releases will never increase
```

'According to Semantic Versioning' may sound like there are some rules in semantic versioning about protocol version, which isn't what we intend to say.

the protocol version, but only minor and major release can increase it.[^2]

As of Libplanet [0.19.0], the current protocol version is 2, and any blocks
produced before Libplanet [0.11.0], which introduced protocol versions,
are treated as the protocol version 0.

[^2]: This does not mean that all major and minor releases increase the protocol
      version. In fact, most releases do not increment the protocol version.

[Block<T>.ProtocolVersion]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blocks.Block-1.html#Libplanet_Blocks_Block_1_ProtocolVersion

Network Transport Layer
-----------------------

*Added in version [0.11.0].*

Since its inception, Libplanet has left much of the low-level networking to
[NetMQ], which is a .NET implementation of [ZeroMQ].  However, now it is
necessary to change its networking layer to be possible without relying on NetMQ
so that Libplanet can be used on various platforms such as mobile and Web.

> The network transport layer is Libplanet's response to that need.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The network transport layer allows using any low-level networking implementation.
```

I felt the word 'that need' bit awkward and thought it would be better to match the Korean source. Or we could say something like:

```suggestion
We created the network transport layer to meet those demands.
```

> This abstraction layer was added experimentally to diversify low-level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We added this abstraction layer experimentally to diversify low-level
```

network transports and to allow game developers to define and use them

> if there are special requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to meet their own requirements.
```

API-wise, it is represented as the [`ITransport` interface][ITransport], and
the [`NetMQTransport`][NetMQTransport] which implements it is built-in.

> As it is a pilot phase, the interface still has been adjusted through several

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As it's in a pilot phase, the interface still has been adjusted through several
```

the `NetMQTransport`.

[ZeroMQ]: https://zeromq.org/
[NetMQ]: https://github.com/zeromq/netmq
[ITransport]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Net.Transports.ITransport.html
[NetMQTransport]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Net.Transports.NetMQTransport.html
[TcpTransport]: https://github.com/planetarium/libplanet/pull/1523
[Swarm<T>]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Net.Swarm-1.html

Configurable <abbr title="Proof-Of-Work">PoW</abbr> Hash Algorithm
------------------------------------------------------------------

*Added in version [0.12.0].*

Previously, Libplanet has used [SHA-256] for proof-of-work.  However, since
version [0.12.0], each network can configure its hash algorithm for
<abbr title="proof-of-work">PoW</abbr> by implementing its
[`IBlockPolicy<T>.GetHashAlgorithm()`
method][IBlockPolicy<T>.GetHashAlgorithm].  As it is not only configurable
for each network, but also for block indices, it can be migrated within
a network after its establishment.

You can use any hash algorithm for <abbr title="proof-of-work">PoW</abbr>
as long as it is a subclass of the [`HashAlgorithm`][HashAlgorithm] abstract

> class, which is built in the .NET runtime.  It is not necessary to be included

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
class, built in the .NET runtime.  It is not necessary to be included
```

> class, which is built in the .NET runtime.  It is not necessary to be included
> in the .NET runtime, but you can use your custom implementation as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class, which is built in the .NET runtime.  Since the hash algorithm is not necessarily required to be included
in the .NET runtime, you can use your custom implementation as well.
```

For instance, [RandomXSharp], a .NET binding library for RandomX we made,
also provides a subclass of `HashAlgorithm`.

The following code shows an example policy requiring blocks below 10,000th
block to use SHA-256 and above blocks to use SHA-512 within a chain:

~~~~ csharp
HashAlgorithmType GetHashAlgorithm(long index) =>
    index <= 10_000
        ? HashAlgorithmType.Of<SHA256>()
        : HashAlgorithmType.Of<SHA512>();
~~~~

[SHA-256]: https://ko.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-2
[IBlockPolicy<T>.GetHashAlgorithm]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blockchain.Policies.IBlockPolicy-1.html#Libplanet_Blockchain_Policies_IBlockPolicy_1_GetHashAlgorithm_System_Int64_
[HashAlgorithm]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.security.cryptography.hashalgorithm
[RandomXSharp]: https://github.com/planetarium/RandomXSharp

Non-blocking Renderers
----------------------

*Added in version [0.14.0].*

[`IRenderer<T>`][IRenderer<T>] and [`IActionRenderer<T>`][IActionRenderer<T>]

> interfaces, event listners that wait for state transitions of node's local
> chain, flow in a blocking manner as they do not spawn new threads.  Suppose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interfaces, event listeners that wait for state transitions of node's local
chain, do not spawn new threads but flow in a blocking manner.  Suppose
```
Placing the phrase `flow in a blocking manner` to the end of the sentence puts more emphasis on the blocking nature of the two interfaces which fits the intention of this section.

some rendering logic calls `Thread.Sleep(60_000)`---continued state transition

> from it on the chain will be made after waiting for 60 seconds of rending.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from it on the chain will be made after waiting for 60 seconds of rendering.
```

> Since version 0.14.0, two decorators which execute time-consuming rendering
> logic in a separated thread without blocking,
> [`NonblockRenderer<T>`][NonblockRenderer<T>] and
> [`NonblockActionRenderer<T>`][NonblockActionRenderer<T>] classes,
> are introduced.  Both classes take another render through their constructors,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since version 0.14.0, we've introduced two decorators which execute time-consuming rendering
logic in a separated thread without blocking-- 
[`NonblockRenderer<T>`][NonblockRenderer<T>] and
[`NonblockActionRenderer<T>`][NonblockActionRenderer<T>] classes. 
Both classes take another render through their constructors,
```

and call its event handlers in a separated thread.  As they are decorators,
the existing renderers can be transformed into a non-blocking style,
by wrapping existing ones with the decorators.

> Despite they are non-blocking, they have their own internal queue to guarantee

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although they are non-blocking, they have their own internal queue to guarantee
```

the order of events.

[IRenderer<T>]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blockchain.Renderers.IRenderer-1.html
[IActionRenderer<T>]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blockchain.Renderers.IActionRenderer-1.html
[NonblockRenderer<T>]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blockchain.Renderers.NonblockRenderer-1.html
[NonblockActionRenderer<T>]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blockchain.Renderers.NonblockActionRenderer-1.html

Configurable Transaction Preference By Miners
---------------------------------------------

*Added in version [0.17.0].*

> The protocol does not require miners to have any priority for transactions
> to include in a block, if these staisfy
> [`IBlockPolicy<T>.ValidateNextBlockTx()` predicate
> method][IBlockPolicy<T>.ValidateNextBlockTx] at least.[^3]  However, if there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Libplanet protocol does not require miners to have any priority for transactions
to include in a block, as long as the
[`IBlockPolicy<T>.ValidateNextBlockTx()` predicate
method][IBlockPolicy<T>.ValidateNextBlockTx] is satisfied.[^3]  However, if there
```

are too many transactions to be included in a block, a miner may need to

> prioritize them so that they are chunked into multiple blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
prioritize them so they are chunked into multiple blocks.
```

Since version 0.17.0, instead of Libplanet arbitrarily prioritizing them,

> miners can configure the priority for transactions to include in a block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
miners themselves can configure the priority for transactions to include in a block.
```

API-wise, [`BlockChain<T>.MineBlock()` method][BlockChain<T>.MineBlock] has the
`txPriority` option which takes an [`IComparer<Transaction<T>>`][IComparer<T>].

[^3]: Of course, there is an order between transactions signed by a signer.
      These are ordered by [`Transaction<T>.Nonce`][Transaction<T>.Nonce].

[IBlockPolicy<T>.ValidateNextBlockTx]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blockchain.Policies.IBlockPolicy-1.html#Libplanet_Blockchain_Policies_IBlockPolicy_1_ValidateNextBlockTx_Libplanet_Blockchain_BlockChain__0__Libplanet_Tx_Transaction__0__
[Transaction<T>.Nonce]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Tx.Transaction-1.html#Libplanet_Tx_Transaction_1_Nonce
[BlockChain<T>.MineBlock]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blockchain.BlockChain-1.html#Libplanet_Blockchain_BlockChain_1_MineBlock_Libplanet_Crypto_PrivateKey_DateTimeOffset_System_Boolean_System_Int32_System_Int32_IComparer_Libplanet_Tx_Transaction__0___CancellationToken_
[IComparer<T>]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.collections.generic.icomparer-1

Blocks Signed By Miners
-----------------------

*Added in version [0.18.0].*

> Since the protocol version 2, i.e., Libplanet 0.18.0, every block is signed with
> the private key of its miner, and it includes the public key besides the addres
> of its miner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since protocol version 2, i.e., Libplanet 0.18.0, every block is signed with
the private key of its miner, and it includes the public key as well as the address
of its miner.
```

API-wise, block signatures are represented as
[`Block<T>.Signature` property][Block<T>.Signature], and miners' public keys
are represented as [`Block<T>.PublicKey` property][Block<T>.PublicKey].

> Blocks with the protocol versions 1 and 0 fill both properties with `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blocks with protocol versions 1 and 0 fill both properties with `null`.
```

[Block<T>.Signature]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blocks.Block-1.html#Libplanet_Blocks_Block_1_Signature
[Block<T>.PublicKey]: https://docs.libplanet.io/0.19.0/api/Libplanet.Blocks.Block-1.html#Libplanet_Blocks_Block_1_PublicKey

Multi-Threaded Mining
---------------------

*Added in version [0.19.0].*

Since Libplanet 0.19.0, each block is mined in parallel, depending on
the number of CPU cores.  The option to configure the number of processes
(workers) will be added in the future.

Many Others
-----------

> Besides that, a lot of new features has been added, and it has significantly
> stabilized in many areas, solving problems that have arisen during months of
> the mainnet ops.  Please check the [entire changelog] of each release
> for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, lots of new features have been added, and it has significantly
stabilized the network in many areas, solving problems that have arisen during the past few months of
the mainnet ops.  Please check the [entire changelog] of each release
for details.
```

Reviewer 2: Do we need the word 'entire'?

Author: I've added the word as it's a summary of multiple releases made over several months.

> If you became interested in Libplanet, please give it a try.  As we are always
> in [our Discord server], feel free to ask any questions if you have!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in Libplanet, please give it a try.  As we are always
in [our Discord server], feel free to ask any questions if you have one!
```
